[ Music ]
>> Lilou: Hello my
delicious co-creators.
Lilou here.
I'm in Santa Barbara today
with delicious Jack Canfield.
Hello!
>> Jack Canfield: Hi!
[Laughing]
>> Lilou: [Laughing]
I'm coming all the way
from France to interview you.
I'm very thrilled, of course,
your name resonates loudly in me
because of all the work you
have done and all the books
that I have read, so
it's very much an honor
to be interviewing you today.
I have so many questions,
and I'm sure a lot
of the people watching right
now on Gaiam are thrilled
to hear you once again, because
of the clarity of your thoughts
and your way of communicating,
I think it's great.
It goes straight to the point.
I love it, thank you!
[Laughing]
>> Jack Canfield: Thank you!
My pleasure to be with you.
I should say merci beaucoup for
coming all the way from France!
>> Lilou: Nice!
So you're the - this, everybody
knows you from the Chicken Soup
of the Soul, of course, and
that was a huge success.
We know you also from The
Secret and Power Focus,
and many other wonderful books.
You speak a lot of success,
right, that's really something
of maximizing your potential.
Is that really at the core
of what you've always
been teaching?
>> Jack Canfield: Well, my
life purpose as I say is
to inspire people
and empower people
to live their highest vision
in the context of love and joy,
so we inspire with stories
like the Chicken Soup
for The Soul books, and we
empower through the tools
that I do with my seminars,
and books like The
Success Principles,
and The Aladdin Factor,
and The Power Focus.
>> Lilou: Yeah.
So how do you see success?
How do you define success?
>> Jack Canfield: I used to
define success as being able
to produce any result
you wanted,
whether it was good health,
great relationship, whatever,
but recently I've
been defining it
as fulfilling your
soul's purpose.
If you come here and
you make a lot of money,
but you don't fulfill
your soul's purpose,
it's like you went to France
to see the Eiffel Tower
and you never got
there, you know?
So it's like I really think that
we all are born with a purpose,
and that our job, if you will,
our joy is to discover what
that purpose is, and then
find ways to manifest it,
through our work,
through our relationships,
and through anything else we do.
>> Lilou: When did that shifted
for you to start speaking
of the soul and life
purpose on that level?
Because I remember you speaking
very much into goals and to -
or is that still actual for you?
Are you - have really
shifted to - ?
>> Jack Canfield: No, I'm
still a big believer in goals,
but I think the goals need to
be aligned with your purpose,
that...that this purpose is
inside of us, this destiny,
these lessons we're here to
learn, these things we're meant
to express, the sources
we're meant to deliver,
the talents we're meant
to develop and express
in the world, and I would say
about maybe five years ago I
began to change that definition.
I mean, I've been doing Chicken
Soup for The Soul since 1993,
so we just celebrated
the 20th anniversary
of the first Chicken
Soup for The Soul book.
But this definition of
success I think really shifted.
I can't tell you why, I
don't remember the event,
but it just became clear
to me that we have -
that's what we're here to do
- to fulfill that purpose.
>> Lilou: Uh-huh.
Is that directly related to also
helping the world and assisting,
you know, in humanity or is it -
can we live our soul purpose
solely for us or is it linked
to something else more
related to humanity?
>> J.C.: Well what I've found
is that when you are engaged
in activities that bring you
great joy, that light you up,
that make you feel
excited and expansive,
it may look to someone like
you're just doing it for you,
but the fact is, when
you're doing that,
you're actually being
of service.
In other words, I love
to teach and write.
Someone else may love
to fix automobiles,
but we need our automobiles
fixed, you know?
And so we need mechanics
on the airlines.
Thank God there are people
who love to do that [laughing]
and you know, clean homes and
grow gardens and grow food
and be artists and architects.
So I always say that, you know,
joy is our inborn
guidance system
that tells us we're
on track, on purpose.
And so one of my friends, I
think it was Martin Luther King
who might have said it,
I'm not sure exactly,
but my friend told me
this recently, he said,
"Don't ask what the world
needs, ask what lights you up,
because the world needs
people who are lit up,"
meaning people are
doing the things
that bring them the
greatest joy.
And I think that many, many
people's greatest joy is to be
of service and that
when you are, you know,
like my wife would probably most
people would say she's living a
very charmed life, you know,
she doesn't have a job for money
out in the world,
but she is someone
who I call a "day maker."
If you were to meet her and
talk to her, you'd leave and go,
"Wow, she made my day!"
So even when she's just talking
to her family and friends
on the phone, she's being of
service, even though it looks
like she's just having
a good time.
So I think the key is find that
thing that makes you come alive,
that gives you the greatest joy.
And when you do that, you
will naturally be of service.
And some of us are meant
to be out there, you know,
ending homelessness, fulfilling
you know getting people
to have more food available,
and being on social injustice
in the world, greening
the planet and so forth.
But I'm not sure that's
everyone that has to be involved
in that in a heavy way.
They want to do things that
don't destroy the environment,
that aren't unfriendly and
unfair, but not everybody has
to be out on a picket line
or you know doing legal work
in the courts to get
people out of jail
that should never have been
there in the first place.
>> Lilou: Uh-huh.
Is that ultimately linked to
having the money to do that?
Because a lot of people
struggle to find the money
so that they can live
their life purpose,
and often it's an excuse?
>> J.C.: I don't think you
have to have a lot of money
to live your life purpose.
I mean, I think having
money is useful.
It's certainly allowed me to
live my life purpose more fully.
I mean, we're sitting in
my home in Santa Barbara,
it's a 6,000 square feet, our
offices are on the property,
I have 12 staff, you know, I can
pretty much get anything I need
to do the things I want to do,
but I was fulfilling my purpose
when I was a high school teacher
in Chicago making
8,000 dollars a year.
You know, I was inspiring
and empowering people
to live their life's vision.
So I think it's an
excuse to say,
"Well I don't have the money."
You know, you can find
a way within the sphere
of influence you have
to actually do the thing
you were meant to do.
We see - you know,
whenever I go to New York,
and I see Puerto Rican or black
kids will be out in the park
and they've got old
paint cans, you know,
these big five-gallon
white drums,
and they're playing
drums on them.
And then they might
have spent seven dollars
for the drumsticks,
but the drums,
they probably just got an old,
you know, construction site.
People that make these wonderful
instruments out of the oil cans
in Jamaica and Trinidad.
So, you know, you can make music
wherever you are, you don't have
to have a grand piano.
>> Lilou: Uh-huh.
I remember you telling the
story in the movie The Secret
about how you really wanted
to have your dreams come true.
Tell us about that
process and is it -
are you still very much
- because I was there
in the audience the day
you were on the Oprah show,
and that famous day was really
shifting and it was beautiful,
you could feel it in the air.
So I'm very much intrigued as
to how that, this whole law
of attraction and The
Secret have evolved for you
and we can go later in that,
but I know you have
a very special story,
maybe you can tell us that?
Many people have heard it,
but with that build,
you know, the money?
>> J.C.: Yeah, well early
on I had a mentor
named W. Clement Stone,
it was a good friend
Napoleon Hill who wrote Think
and Grow Rich, and they
taught that, you know,
if you have a goal, you need
to believe in it, affirm it,
visualize it, and
then feel the feelings
as if it were already true, and
so based on that, I was working
with Stone at the
time, and he said,
"I want you to set a goal that's
so big, that if you achieve it,
you'll know it's only because
of what I've taught you
that you accomplished it."
And at the time, I was
making 8,000 dollars a year
as a teacher in Chicago.
And so, I said, "Okay,
my goal is
to make 100,000 dollars
in one year."
And that just seemed like me
sitting here saying I'm going
to be a billionaire next year.
And so I said "But I'm going
to do everything you say."
So I went home and I
wrote the affirmation,
"God is my unlimited supply
in large sums of money,
come to me quickly and easily,
and through the grace of God
as I easily and effortlessly
earn and invest
and spend 100,000 a year."
That was my affirmation.
And then I had a visualization
where I'd close my eyes,
and I'd see my 100,000
lifestyle.
And back then it was going
to be like, you know,
Native American rugs on the
wall, which I wanted to collect
at the time, living on a lake,
and having a certain
car and so forth.
And then I thought, "Well, I
should have an external thing,"
so I created a 100,000 bill, and
it was about this big and about
that tall out of green paper,
and I then just took an overhead
projector and projected it
onto the one-dollar bill, traced
it, and then added a bunch
of zeroes, and I put that
on the ceiling above my bed,
so every morning I'd wake up
and first thing I'd see was
the 100,000 dollar bill,
which reminded me to go
inside and visualize.
And then what happened was I
remember I did that every day
for about 30 days, and then
somewhere in that fourth
or fifth week, I was
in the shower and all
of a sudden I had this
100,000 dollar idea.
I had never had a 100,000
dollar idea before.
I'd had a book at that
time called "100 Ways
to Enhance Self-Concept
in the Classroom."
And every time that book
got sold, I made 25 cents.
That was my half of the royalty,
it was co-authored
with another guy.
Book sold for 6.95,
if you can remember
when books were that cheap.
And so [laughing], and
so I thought "Okay,
if I can sell 400,000
copies of this book,
I'd have 100,000 dollars."
I didn't know how to do that,
I'd never done it before,
but that was the first time
I had a leveragable idea
that actually seemed real.
So then I started visualizing
selling that many books.
That was my next visualization.
And then I started to see
things I'd never seen before.
In other words, the law
of attraction starts
to bring things into
your consciousness,
the reticular activating
system in your brain opens up,
and you see things
that were always there.
Like right now, you're not
aware of what you're feeling
in your right foot,
but as soon as I say
"right foot," you
feel it, right?
>> Lilou: Uh-huh.
>> J.C.: Well that information
is streaming up your leg,
into the lower part
of your brain,
into what they call the
reticular activating system,
and was being filtered
out, it was not important.
So I'm in my grandmother's
bathroom, and I see something
that was always there,
but I never saw
because it wasn't relevant.
My reticular system
hadn't opened to it.
It was a Reader's Digest,
and it said something
like 8 million readers
monthly in 17 languages.
And I thought, "Wow, if
8 million readers knew
about my book, certainly
400,000 people would buy it."
So I went ahead and I called
up Reader's Digest, and I said,
"What does it cost
to take out an ad?"
And they said, "Well what
are you advertising?"
And I told them, and they
said it should be one page ad,
it should be six months in a row
so people see it over and over
and get used to it, and
you let us write the copy
and it should be full
color and all this.
I said, "Well what
would that cost me?"
And I heard a little
calculator in the background,
adding machine before
calculators, you know,
that we have now, and it's going
tsk-tsk-tsk [assumed spelling],"
and it came out to
108,000 dollars.
And I said "I won't be doing
that," and they said "Why not?"
and I said, "Well number one,
I don't have 108,000 dollars,
and number two, the
game I'm playing,
I end up minus 8,000 dollars,
it doesn't really work."
And so my wife, then, saw
another one of these things,
it was a resource, and
she said, "You know?
Reader's Digest has
something in it besides ads.
There's articles.
Why don't you write an article?"
So I wrote an article,
I sent that off
to Reader's Digest,
it got rejected.
But then I saw another resource,
I'm at the supermarket,
it said "National Inquirer,"
which is a newspaper they sell
here, it's kind of a, you know,
sensational rag they call them,
and but they had 12 million
readers a week and I thought,
"Whoa, 12 million readers
a week that's better
than Reader's Digest,"
so I called them up,
ad rates were still ridiculous,
but I started visualizing myself
in the Reader's Digest
and the National Inquirer.
That became my new
visualization.
Now we're about three
or four months
into the year at this point.
And all of a sudden, I'm
doing a talk down in New York
for Hunter College, I was
teaching teachers at the time.
600 people showed up
for this workshop.
And at the end of it, this
woman came up and she said,
"I'd like to interview you."
I said, "Great, who
do you write for?"
She said, "The National
Inquirer."
I went, "do-do-do-do"
[Laughing] Amazing!
So anyway, that article got
published, and a whole lot
of books got sold, and then
we saw one other resource came
into our awareness.
When we sold that book,
every book I got a quarter.
And my wife said, "You know,
if we were a bookstore,
when we sell the book,
we'd make three dollars,
because that's the retail
market, now you only have
to sell 33,000 books,
not you know 400,000."
So I was like, "Whoa, okay."
So now, we started the
mail order bookstore,
we started sending out,
picking you know small ads
in like family newspapers
and magazines and things,
and we started selling
a lot of books,
and then we saw another
resource which was Wow.
They've already proven
they'll buy a self-esteem book,
what if we had a catalogue of
other self-esteem activities
and books and tapes and CDs?
So long story short, we end
up with an eight page
catalogue, 32 items in it.
We start taking this bookstore
on the road to conferences.
We're averaging about 2,000
dollars a week in profits,
so we now have 100,000
dollar a year business,
and there were some other
things that occurred.
But by the end of the year,
we had made 92,328 dollars.
So we didn't make
100 - but my wife
and I were not sitting there
going, "Oh, what a bummer,
we didn't reach our
goal," we went, "Wow!
This really works!"
And my wife said, "Do you think
it will work for a million?"
And I said, "Well, it worked
for 100,000, let's do that."
So we got a million dollar bill,
put that on the ceiling,
and it was -
>> Lilou: Which year was that?
When was that?
>> J.C.: This was now
around - well the first year
when all this happened
was in the early 1970s.
And then by 19...uh, I think 93?
So you know, it was
a few years later,
but we had this vision
constantly.
I got my first million
dollar check.
It was for 1,130,325.38
if I remember correctly,
and the next year,
we got four of those.
And then we had a year where
we made 12 million dollars.
So I mean, it's just like
it didn't happen overnight,
but that visualization,
it did the first year,
but then the visualization
just kept driving and driving
and driving, and now, you know,
I always make several million
dollars a year or more.
>> Lilou: Yeah.
So I remember The Secret
and The Law of Attraction,
and you being part
of the transformation
or leadership council,
having started that.
How did that whole Law
of Attraction evolve
for you since that movie?
What was your experience of it?
>> J.C.: Well I had
been living The Law
of Attraction and teaching it.
I don't think I was calling it
The Law of Attraction so much
as calling it positive
thinking and things like that.
And then when Rhonda Byrne made
The Secret and invited me in
and a lot of the people from
the Transformational Leadership
Council to be in that movie,
in fact, they filmed, I think,
13 of us at one of our
meetings in Colorado.
Then it really, that
took off and kind
of re-vectored my
career for a few years,
because I spent the
majority of my time going
to Secret conferences, they'd
have like five or six of us,
Bob Proctor and me and Lisa
Nichols and Marci Shimoff
and all speaking, and
I got to travel all
over the world doing that.
And I wrote a book called Jack
Canfield's Key to Living Law
of Attraction, which
did very well.
And I made friends with a lot
of people I only knew about,
like Joe Vitali, and
people like that.
So it was a great, great
forward movement for me
in my career, and
impacting people.
But I think also the thing
that I've been doing also -
The Secret, it talks
about action, it doesn't -
not saying you don't
need to do that,
but doesn't stress it enough.
And a lot of people think, "I
just need to sit in my room,
visualize a Mercedes, and
somehow one's going to drive
up into my driveway and
someone will knock on my door
and hand me the keys."
That could happen,
but it's unlikely.
You have to go do
things that produce cars,
like maybe get a job or you
know, work, you can get ideas.
You can get resources.
You'll get possibilities.
I mean, I once had a guy going
to Europe for a year, he said,
"I'm going to Europe, and I
have this Audi, I don't want it
to just sit here, would you
drive it for me for a year?"
I went, "Sure," so
that could happen.
But it was only for a year,
and then he wanted it back.
>> Lilou: I have this
thing for a Porsche.
>> J.C.: Huh?
>> Lilou: Back then, when I was
practicing, I was living back
in Miami, and somebody handed
me a Porsche for two months.
I barely knew that
person, I'm like, "Okay!"
[Laughing]
>> J.C.: Well maybe
it's only Porsche/Audi,
since it's basically the
same company that does that.
But no, seriously, I think that
you start - once you visualize
and affirm and desire, and you
know, get your vibration up
and do the ask, believe,
receive that The Secret teaches,
part of - this was something
Marcia Wieder taught me,
I thought it was
really valuable.
She said, "Part of
believing is taking action.
It demonstrates your belief.
I believe that this is
going to work, so I'm going
to take action on it."
I always, since she
shared that with me,
I came up with my own metaphor,
which is, if I was sitting here
and telling people that I was
going to run a seminar tonight
on levitation, and I'll
teach everyone to levitate
for six feet off the
ground for ten minutes,
most people wouldn't sign up.
And the reason they wouldn't
is they've never seen
anyone levitate.
They've seen a few
people bouncing
around on Fairfield
Highway, you know,
but no one's ever levitated for
six feet for six minutes, um,
there's no belief that I
could actually do that.
So why would they sign up?
So we don't take action on
things we don't believe.
So if we do take action
on a belief, you know,
that I can find my ideal mate,
or I can have my ideal job,
or I am going to make a
million dollars, or I'm going
to end hunger in my county,
then when I start taking action
it's telling the universe, "Hey,
he believes this is possible"
and that brings the
vibration up,
it actually accelerates the Law
of Attraction in my opinion.
>> Lilou: Mmm, the
vibration it's important
to stay, to keep it high?
>> J.C.: Yes, it's
important, you know,
basically I think
Abraham talks about this
and when Esther Hicks
channels that,
that you have this conveyor
belt that's bringing you things
that you've wanted, that
you've desired, you've said,
"Okay Universe, this is
what I want," but then it's
like having this
big, big box coming
and a very small mailbox,
it just can't fit in.
And so when we are in a state of
gratitude, when we're in a state
of love, when we're in a state
of joy, when we're in a state
of excitement, when we're in
a state of forgiveness, then,
and we're not judging, because
I think judging or anger or any
of that is a lower vibration,
and so we will attract things
to us, our mailbox will be
big enough to receive things
that fit into that
level of vibration.
So when I'm in a state of love
and joy and you know, gratitude
and all that, it's
very expansive,
and a lot of things can come in.
So basically, I love the
metaphor that Esther Hicks uses,
is where you've got this
conveyor belt with all kinds
of stuff backed up
that can't get in,
until you raise your vibration.
And I think too that we
need to raise our vibration
and it's not, again, just
you know that someone's going
to plop a car in our
driveway, but we're going
to start attracting the kinds
of people, like your friend
who had a Porsche, my
friend who had an Audi,
as opposed to someone
driving an old Chevrolet
who doesn't have the higher
vibration of abundance
and prosperity in their
life at that time.
So vibration is critical.
And I think through meditation,
through you know
gratitude processes,
through...I teach people, make
a list of 25 things you love
to do, then every day spend
at least an hour doing one
of those things, because when
you're doing something you love
to do, you feel good.
And so that's another way
to raise your vibration up.
>> Lilou: One of the things
I remember way back then
that really was, that
got stuck in my mind,
is being 100 percent
responsible for our life.
Like, isn't that one
of the first big steps
before any of this?
>> J.C.: Yeah, in my book
The Success Principles,
I say the first chapter is
take 100 percent responsibility
for your life, for your
results, because if you don't,
then you're thinking
someone else is responsible,
and then you're blaming
them when it doesn't work,
you're complaining about what
doesn't work, and blaming
and complaining are lower
vibrations, for starters,
plus they create the
belief inside of you
that someone else is
responsible for my happiness,
for my fulfillment, for my
success, and it's not true.
The truth is, we are
100 percent responsible.
I just went to a talk last
night with Eben Alexander,
who wrote Proof of Heaven.
>> Lilou: [Inaudible]
a few months ago
in Marseille in France.
>> J.C.: Oh really.
>> Lilou: Lovely man.
>> J.C.: He's getting
around [laughing].
>> Lilou: Yes, oh yes.
>> J.C.: He's a very lovely guy.
And he was saying that
same thing, you know,
that basically whatever's
going on around us,
we're the one who's creating
it, you know, and so we see
that message coming from
every ancient tradition,
from modern psychology, from
quantum physics, from the law
of attraction, and so
it's just time to get
that if your life isn't
what you want it to be,
the only constant
variable is you.
>> Lilou: Yeah.
>> J.C.: You know, someone
said you can't escape yourself,
wherever you go,
you take yourself.
And invariably, people keep
re-creating the same experience
over and over.
People - I know people who
have been married five times,
and gotten divorced, and every
time they think it's the wife's
fault, because they keep
marrying the same kind
of person, they keep being
the same kind of person,
they don't grow and change,
nothing's going to shift.
>> Lilou: Mm, some people
blame God or the universe
for not having those things.
What is, and I hear we have
to be 100 percent responsible
in our lives, so what
is the right balance
between us being responsible,
and us also being
confident enough
in having this great
relationship too
with the universe and God?
>> J.C.: Well, I think
you know your relationship
with God is probably a mirror
of your relationship
to everyone else.
You know, if you think other
people are responsible,
you think God did
it to you, you know?
I love Michael Beckwith,
he teaches these four
stages of spiritual growth.
He says the first stage
is victim - "Oh God,
why'd you do it to me?"
You know? And the next stage
is he calls manipulation,
where you learn that there
are some laws in the universe
and you can manipulate those
laws to get what you want.
That's where a lot of -
like the law of attraction -
where a lot of people
are with that.
And the third stage is
where you realize you are -
for all these laws, there
must be a law maker,
there must be something
predictable and dependable
in the universe, and then you
begin to go, "Oh, maybe I need
to surrender to that which
is brighter than I am,"
or tells you more powerful
or more awesome than I am,
and so you become a channel
for God, then it's not my will
but thy will, and then
ultimately you realize, "Wait,
you're not a channel
for God, you are God.
You're not all of God, anymore
than one drop of water is all
of the ocean, but the
ocean isn't separate
from the ocean any more than
we're separate from God,"
and you know, I think
Einstein said,
one of the great physicists
of all time, he says,
"If you are thinking that you're
separate from everything else,
you're living under
the grand delusion,"
he didn't say illusion,
he said delusion.
Like it's a mental
illness, and so I tend
to be what I call an inverse
paranoid, that I believe
that everything is
plotting to do me well,
as opposed to the universe
is plotting to do me bad.
So it's not "Why me, Oh
God," it's like, "Oh, God!
Why me? Why do I get
all this good stuff?"
It's a total different shift.
So I think when people
are blaming God,
it's probably a projection of
them blaming their parents,
because we often talk about God
the Father, and I think people,
until they evolve
spiritually, their relationship
with God is one of
the relationship
of the un...un-individuated,
un-mature, not, you know,
fully cooked relationship
with their parents.
>> Lilou: Mmm.
And the power of
emotion, in not emotion,
and though [laughing]
but imagination, huh?
Where is that coming from and
how can we - is that really
like a martyr for
bringing even more?
>> J.C.: Yeah, yeah...I
love the word imagine
because someone broke
it down recently,
I saw this on a website
somewhere, it said "imagine,"
then it says "I...mag...in..."
and then it went,
"I'm...a...gin."
And gin is the epic word
for genie, so I am a genie.
So the way we bring
into being things is
through our imagination, we
actually are like a genie,
you know, your wish
is my command.
And so when we realize
the power,
the creative power the
imagination is amazing,
that what we visualize,
what we think about,
and fantasize about, we're
actually bringing about.
And so we're either bringing
about something we don't want,
that's called worrying, because
you're visualizing the things
you don't want.
Or we are fantasizing and
imagining and bringing
into being things we do want.
You know, a vision
of a better world,
vision of a healthier body,
a better relationship,
more abundance, more
peace, whatever it might be.
>> Lilou: Mmm...I love it,
and sometimes I wonder
where it comes from.
>> J.C.: The imagination?
>> Lilou: Yeah.
>> J.C.: Well...
>> Lilou: See sometimes
it comes to you, too,
as you said, the
channeling part.
It's amazing how
it can go vroom!
>> J.C.: Yeah, I think
when you are, we are, I am,
tuned in...meaning
we're not blocked by all
of our ego thoughts, and
we're in meditation or we're
out in nature taking a walk,
it's kind of when the
mind is a little bit free,
it's not so focused.
Those things we focus on,
there's actually
research on creativity.
And they talk about
the incubation stage.
In incubation, you really
- well, first of all,
you have a focus stage.
You focus really hard, like
Einstein trying to figure
out the law of relativity.
Or me writing about the success
principles and trying to figure
out a problem I have
in my writing,
or wanting to understand, you
know, visualization let's say.
And then you let it go.
Just like, you know, the egg
is there and it's not hatching
for a while, it's incubating.
And then eventually, all of a
sudden it's time for this idea
to hatch, and it comes
up from the subconscious.
It's almost like we've
impregnated our subconscious
with an intention.
Some people would say we
impregnated source energy,
the universe, with intention.
Probably both.
And then what happens
is it has to gestate.
And after it's gestated
for a certain amount
it's time to come out.
But you have to have enough
quiet time to actually hear it.
So sometimes it will
actually happen in the shower,
sometimes driving a car
because you're off daydreaming.
Sometimes it's while
you're walking on the ocean.
Sometimes it's in a
set of meditation.
So, and often when you're
waking up in that twilight state
in the morning, and
boom this idea comes in.
But that's the result of having
intended and struggled with
and really thought
deeply about it.
So then you can let it go.
It's like, ask, let it go,
believe the universe will take
care of it, and then receive it.
The same thing happens
with creativity.
I intend that I want a solution
to this problem or this idea.
I let it go.
It incubates in my subconscious
then the universal mind,
and then all of a sudden
I receive the idea,
this breakthrough idea,
and that's how it works.
So it does mean you do need
to study, you do need to think
about things, you need to
engage your intellectual mind,
but then release it.
>> Lilou: Mm-hmm.
>> J.C.: And then eventually
the intuition takes over,
and then be open, have
some time, some space,
where the idea can come.
I'll give you an example.
With Chicken Soup for the
Soul, we had finished the book.
We had no title.
Didn't have a clue what
it was going to be called.
Nice stories [laughing].
And so Mark and I, Mark Victor
Hansen, my co-author and I,
we said we're going to meditate
every day for a week and see
if we can receive a title.
But we intended, you know, we'd
struggled with titles and none
of them worked, none
of them felt great.
So we went into meditation.
Nothing happened the
first couple days.
The third day, I'm sitting
there in my bedroom,
on my little meditation
pillow, and boom!
I see this chalkboard, and
this big hand comes out
and writes Chicken Soup on
it, in big white letters.
And I said to the hand,
"What the heck does chicken
soup have to do with our book?"
And the voice of the hand
said, "Um, when you were sick,
as a child, your grandmother
would give you chicken soup."
I said, "This isn't a
book about sick people!"
And the voice said,
"People's spirits are sick.
They're living in resignation,
fear and hopelessness."
This was in 92, there
was a recession going on,
and I thought, "Chicken Soup
for the Spirit," "Chicken Soup
for the Soul" and
I got goose bumps.
And I called up, well I told
my wife, she got goose bumps.
Called Mark, he got goose bumps.
Told our agent, he
got goose bumps.
We went to New York,
talked to 22 publishers,
nobody got goose
bumps [laughing].
So it took us almost a
year to sell that book,
but eventually Health
Communications bought it,
and the book went on to sell
ten million copies in English,
just in America, and probably
another 25 or 30 million
around the world,
and spawned a series
that now has 200 books plus,
and over a half billion books,
500 million books in print.
So that, when you get something
from meditation, and it comes
in like that, and I call
it goose bumps, God bumps,
in other words you're
getting a sense
that this is really important,
this is really right on.
That title went on to become
a brand, it's now valued
at about 100 million dollars.
Who knew?
>> Lilou: Yeah, that's
a lot of money.
>> J.C.: Yes, it is.
>> Lilou: How do you feel
about that kind of money now?
>> J.C.: Well...
>> Lilou: How is it -
what is your relationship
to money these days?
>> J.C.: Wonderful [laughing].
>> Lilou: [Laughing]
Looks like it!
>> J.C.: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
No, you know, I see money
as encapsulated energy.
You know, we worked really
hard for a lot of years
to collect a lot of stories
and we came from our hearts
and we really cared, and
we worked hard to get
that out there so people
would take advantage of it,
and we created a lot of value.
And I think the more
value you give out,
then the more value
comes back to you.
Sometimes it comes in
the form of a bottle
of wine somebody gives you.
Sometimes it comes in
the form of somebody
who wants to be your assistant.
Sometimes it comes
in the form of money.
And money, the nice thing about
money is you can exchange it
for anything pretty much.
You know, if you want
to buy groceries,
you want to buy a car,
you want to buy a house,
you want to buy a
ticket to go to Paris.
And, so, you know, I have a lot
of encapsulated energy
that's available to me.
But the majority of it's been
used to grow our business
so that we can serve
more people.
I mean, I have a lot of
nice stuff around me,
but I have no desire
for any more.
I mean, what would I do with it?
But I really like taking
the money and being able
to create scholarships for
people, to write more books,
to generate more products that
help to give to philanthropy,
we do a lot of charitable
giving, and we always have.
In fact, with the
Chicken Soup books,
we've always given 10
percent, sometimes 25 percent,
of the profits to a designated
charity related to the book.
So I believe that the
more you give back,
the more that comes back,
and that's just a big cycle
that never ends, and
it's been very proven
to be true in my life.
>> Lilou: Hmm.
So 100 million is 100 million
basically, there's no attachment
or nothing, it just is?
>> J.C.: Yeah, just like that
carpet is 100 million dollars
is, I don't have all
of that right now,
I mean I have partners that
it all gets divided up with,
but the point being that you
know, money is not an issue
in my life anymore,
which is the life.
I mean, it's, you know, this guy
named Abraham Maslow has this
famous Maslow's Hierarchy
of Needs,
that says once you've met your
basic survival needs for warmth
and shelter and food and
water and protection,
you've met your needs
for physical comfort,
for friends,
you've met your self-esteem
needs, which I have plenty
of because I feel like I've
done really great things
or I'm a nice guy, then you move
up into what they
call the higher needs,
self-actualization needs
which is now all I want
to do is actualize my full
potential and be of service.
>> Lilou: Mm-hmm.
So that's why really your
tag line on your website is
"Maximize Your Potential,"
that's really
to you the core,
the most important?
>> J.C.: Yeah, maximizing
my human potential
and helping everyone
else maximize theirs.
And I think that we all
have amazing potential
for whether it's to be an
artist or to be, you know,
physically fit or to be
brilliant, speak five languages,
you know, most people in
Europe speak five languages.
Most people in America
speak one or two.
And you know, research tells us
the average person easily could
learn to speak 12
languages if they chose to.
>> Lilou: Right.
>> J.C.: And, you know, I have a
friend who speaks 20 languages,
and then very cogently
and very articulately,
and you know, a lot
of vocabulary.
So that's our potential.
Our potential is we can
all learn to walk on fire,
like Tony Robbins
does at his workshops,
or you know, other people do.
We can learn to hold our breath
for four minutes
underwater if we choose to.
We can learn to sing, we can
learn to dance, we can learn
to write poetry, we
can learn to, you know,
do Internet marketing.
Whatever it is, we
have the potential.
And most people, psychologists
tell us we're using between 5
and 10 percent of our
potential, so I think we've got
to go at least 30 percent.
>> Lilou: Uh-huh.
>> J.C.: Yeah.
>> Lilou: I know, you know
feng shui, because of,
from I know Marie Diamond, I had
the pleasure to interview her
in Monaco, and I know she's
done some work and you're aware
of the potentials,
is it something
that you really looked at?
>> J.C.: Yeah, if you
look around my home,
you'll see all kinds
of feng shui.
You know, often what are
called solutions to problems.
You put a water function here,
you hang a crystal there,
put plants here, etc. Marie
Diamond was the first person
to feng shui her home, and then
now a guy named Master Yao,
he's Chinese, I call
him "Mazzayao, Mazzayao,
he fix a house," you know?
[Laughing].
>> Lilou:
[ Laughing ]
>> J.C.: But every
year, you know,
he comes, and things change.
You know, as things in the
universe change, so we update.
But I'll tell you, Marie
Diamond came in that corner
over there was a table on
point, and I said I wanted
to do more international
travel, and she said,
"Well that's your success
corner, and you need
to put a globe there."
So we put a globe there, and
within about three months,
I got invited to speak in
11 different countries.
My wife said, "We're taking
the globe out of the corner,
because you're never home."
[Laughing]
>> Lilou:
[ Laughing ]
>> J.C.: So we saw very
quick results from feng shui.
>> Lilou: Uh-huh.
So there's some outside
tools to help us,
but there is really this...is
it really all those tools are
helping us to really realign
and so we can attract really
all those amazing things
that we want?
Because sometimes we focus a
little bit too much outside
don't we?
Outside of ourselves?
Like feng shui alone
is not enough.
>> J.C.: Yeah, I think Marie
Diamond says, you know,
she divides, she calls
it luck in the tradition
that she's trained in, and she
says one-third luck is your
Karma, one-third luck is
what you do in this life,
the kind of thing
we're talking about,
100 percent responsibility.
And one-third can be
affected by feng shui,
the energy that you direct by
rearranging your environment,
the colors, and all of the
ways, you know wood here,
and metal there, and
water there, and so forth.
And so my point of view,
let's say we're only
30 percent responsible,
but I want to be 100
percent responsible
for my 30 percent, you know?
The problem in relationships
is when people say, "Oh,
you know it's a 50/50
relationship
and it's always your 50 percent
that's the problem" you know?
So I think when I worked
with literally probably
a million students
in the last 40 years,
that the people that act
as if they're 100
percent responsible,
they have the most amazing
lives, because they say, "Okay,
if this is happening,
how did I create it?
How did I promote it?
How do I allow it to continue?"
So if you look, you're
going to see an answer.
Now I don't believe that
everyone who dies in a Tsunami,
or every plane that
goes down everyone
on that plane was karmically
responsible for that plane going
down or that tsunami happening,
especially little children.
But, I do believe that if we act
as if we're 100 percent
responsible for everything
that happens, our lives
are much more magical,
much more successful,
much more joyful.
>> Lilou: Mmm.
How do you feel about the
world and what's happening
in the world and how things
are shifting maybe for people?
Do you feel people are awakening
and they're starting
to view it that way?
>> J.C.: Yes, I do.
I've traveled just in the last,
I don't know, five months?
I've been in Oman, Kuwait,
Bahrain, Dubai, India,
going to Poland in
a couple of months.
I've been to Bali, Hong Kong,
etc. And everywhere I go,
I see huge amounts of
awakening occurring.
I see it in the way people in
general are acting and talking,
I see it in the media,
I see it on television,
I see it in my workshops.
There's a different
kind of energy there.
I see it in the laws
that are being passed.
Now obviously, there's all kinds
of pain and trauma in the world,
whether it's in Syria, or
Egypt, or Lebanon or wherever,
South Africa, you know,
but whenever I look at it,
I see that there's these -
things are breaking apart.
And even though it may look
uncomfortable and bloody
and some people are
getting hurt and they are,
in the bigger picture, the old
forms aren't working anymore,
you know, the breakdown
of the financial system.
People are questioning
that a whole lot more
than they ever did.
Social justice, the
way the economy works,
the way you know the whole
environmental movement,
the self-empowerment movement.
The unimaginable number
of coaches there are.
The unimaginable
number of people
like yourself who've got
TV shows, whether they're
on cable channels, whether
they're on Internet channels,
there's just more
and more light,
more and more people you know
talking about meditation,
waking up, talking
about compassion,
the law of attraction, whatever.
You know, in China the number
one DVD for the last couple
of years has been The Secret.
>> Lilou: Really!
>> J.C.: I mean, who knew?
You know? And we see
that all over the world.
I think The Secret is
like in 17 languages now.
People in Africa who couldn't
afford to buy them were lining
up in Nigeria and places
like that just to get
into the theater to watch it.
And so, you know,
obviously, you know many
of those places there's
a lot of pain and misery,
but I think you know
often people have
to hit bottom before they kind
of go, "This sucks, I don't want
to do it anymore, I'm sick and
tired of being sick and tired."
But even though, I have
so many friends right now
that are building
schools in Africa,
that are providing scholarships
for girls to go to college,
that are empowering women.
We see the women's movement
in third world countries,
in Africa, in the
middle east, in India.
This girl, Malika
[assumed spelling],
in Pakistan standing up.
I mean, that would have been
unheard of ten years ago.
>> Lilou: Hmm, beautiful!
Is there last thoughts
you want to leave us with?
>> J.C.: Well, I mean the
thought I always leave everyone
with is you can have anything
you want if you believe it.
You have within you
everything you need
to get everything you want, but
you have to become conscious.
You have to focus on it.
You have to put time in on it.
You have to - I believe
success can be effortless,
but it does require attention.
You have to put some time in.
>> Lilou: Yeah.
Eye on the ball.
>> J.C.: Keep your eye on the
ball, there you go [laughing].
>> Lilou: Thank you so much
Jack, it was wonderful to speak
with you and being able to share
this all over the Internet.
>> J.C.: Oh, my pleasure.
Thank you for the opportunity,
I appreciate it [background
music].
>> Lilou: Thank you!
Much, much love!
Big kisses from Santa Barbara.
Bye bye.